Hallo liebe Hörerinnen und Hörer, wir melden uns kurz aus der Zukunft. Seit Folge 270 heißt
dieser Podcast Geschichten aus der Geschichte. Mehr dazu findet ihr unter Geschichte.fm.
Und jetzt geht's zurück in die Vergangenheit. Viel Spaß.
Lernen ein bisschen Geschichte, lernen ein bisschen Geschichte, dann werden Sie sehen,
wie sich der Reporter damals entwickelt hat. Wie er sich damals entwickelt hat.
Hallo und willkommen zu einem besonderen Episode von Zeitsprung Geschichten aus der Geschichte.
Mein Name ist Richard und meistens würde Daniel sein Name nennen. Aber Daniel ist nicht hier,
weil ich heute einen sehr besonderen Gast habe. Und dieser sehr besondere Gast ist Dr. Emma Southern.
Danke, dass ich meinen Namen auch korrekt nennen konnte.
Wow. Am I? So few people do.
What is a common mispronunciation? People pronounce it south on.
Oh right. No, I don't know. I think I did my research.
That was good research, thank you. Perfect. Right, so Dr. Emma Southern, maybe
I researched you a bit the way someone does research on the internet. So I went to your
website and I found out that you have a PhD in ancient history from the University of
Birmingham. You taught ancient and medieval history for a while until you were fed up
with the grimness of academia. So now you are an independent historian or independent
researcher and you write books.
And I write books, yeah. So I left academia and then I taught writing for a couple of
years. I taught academic writing and then I quit that and I was a freelance writer for
a while and now I sell books during the day and write books at night.
That is a good way of doing it. I mean, better than the other way around.
It is, yeah. You don't want to have to sell books at night.
Even though it probably would be quite nice to write during the day, right?
It would be quite nice, but a night owl, so it works out for me. When I was a freelance
writer I just slept all day and wrote all night, so this works out better.
So now you're even earning money as well.
Yeah, I know. It's a real privilege.
So the reason why you're on this special episode is because of a book you wrote and the book
you wrote is Agrippina, Empress Exile Hustler Whore. I mean, it's a very catchy title already.
It is a very catchy title. Everywhere else has taken that bit of the title off, so in
England it got published with that title and then it's not got that title in America.
Well, go figure.
Unsurprisingly.
But it sounds so good.
It does. And I don't want to spoil the book for anyone here. We're probably going to
spoil it because we're going to be talking about Agrippina quite a bit. But I do want
to spoil the fact that it's a very good book. I read it and there's this phrase people use
when they say something is eminently readable.
Yes, that is a phrase, I know.
And it's not just eminently readable, it's a fun read as well. How should I put it? If
this is the way you teach people to write academically, I only in the future want to
read books written by your students.
Yeah. If I took anything away from you, it should be that it should be. I think that
things, if you want someone to learn from or take anything away from what you've written,
then they should enjoy reading it. They shouldn't feel like they're being lectured. So I tried
to make it feel like it was a nice... the aim was that you would feel like you were
sitting with me in a pub and we were having a nice chat about Agrippina. And I was having
a kind of conversation with you rather than that I was standing in a lecture theatre lecturing
you for hours with boring slides.
Well, I think you quite succeeded there.
I mean, the interesting thing is, and maybe we might touch upon that later on as well,
but it's not just a conversation, sort of a conversation in a book, it's academic as
well. You cite your sources, right?
Yeah, absolutely. It's got good rigorous history. I sneak the history in and hopefully people
don't notice too much. So it's in there and quite a lot of it is really like analysis
of the sources because they're so difficult and there's huge gaps in the sources where
you have to work around when you're writing a biography of somebody. So when you look
at how much of the book is telling a story and how much of it is analysing sources, quite
a lot of it is me talking about the sources. But I've kind of tried to do it in such a
way that it doesn't feel like it either undermines the story and it isn't boring. That's the
main thing I wanted. I want it to not be boring. And to be like, most of history, like when
you're a historian, mostly what you do is look at the sources and analyse them and think
really hard about them and look at them from loads of different directions. And that's
the fun bit. That's the bit that gets historians up in the morning to read some more sources
and enjoy them. And I kind of wanted that bit to be fun as well as the bits where people
are kicking their way into rooms and shouting at emperors, which is also very fun. But I
think that history is just, I mean, I love it. I have tried to quit being a historian
three times now and I have attempted to do other careers. And every time I have just
ended up coming back because I love it so much and nothing else makes me want to get
up in the morning and keep doing it. And I love it enough that I have a proper job that
I go to nine to five and then I come home and I sit and do more history because I just
think it's great. And I wanted in my books, I want people to feel how much I love it.
Absolutely. Well, I think judging from your book, you're really good at it too. So it'd
be a shame if you quit it.
That does help.
No, but coming back to what you said about the sources and discussing the sources in
the book and I'm kind of derailing my own concept that I've written down here for this
episode because we are already talking about the sources, but you know, honestly, it's
a really interesting bit to me as well because oftentimes you read a historical book and
there's actually no talk of the sources at all. So everything is presented as fact,
but we all know that. Or people that have studied history, they know that most of this
is interpretation, a lot of it is conjecture and then there's no discussion of the sources
and the way you do it and the way I like to do it when we talk about sources in the podcast
as well is just to show people how, first of all, what the job of a historian is, that
you actually have to analyse the sources and sort of make up your mind whether a source
is trustworthy or whether it's not trustworthy and why certain things are written down and
why certain things are not written down. And I think that you have done very well in the
talk and I think it's sort of one of the cornerstones of the whole telling of the story of Agrippina,
that it's basically a problem you have with the sources and you have to deal with it.
It is. She is a very interesting person in that, when you're looking at the sources,
she dominates certain sections of the sources. So particularly Tacitus is history, the Annals
and later Dio's Roman history. She just dominates these sections and there seems to be so much
about her, but then big chunks of her life are just completely absent and there are entire
decades where we have no idea what she was doing because she is only useful to the source
writers at certain times. So then they write about her a lot and we know, well we hope
we know, loads about five-year periods of her life where she seems to be really fascinating
to the sources and then all of a sudden she's not for five-year periods. So she's a really
interesting person when you're thinking about why people in the Roman world wrote down what
they did and what kind of messages they were trying to portray and to send with their writing
and to be able to see that they were not writing, regardless of how much Tacitus tries to say
that he's writing, he's just writing objective facts and he claims that he's just writing
the things that happened in a row. But when you look at how he shows Agrippina, you can
see where he is picking and choosing what he wants to say happened in any given year
and is making his decisions about how he wants to portray a particular year in Roman history,
depending on whether he wants it to be a good year, in which case there's no Agrippina,
or a bad year, in which case there's loads of Agrippina.
Of course. Exactly. And I think this is a good moment where we can sort of segue into
who Agrippina actually was. Because we're already talking about her, as if everyone
knows who Agrippina is. Maybe before we sort of go into the details of why she actually
is that well known and why she wants that special kind of person, maybe you could sort
of give just a short description of who that woman is, who she was, and what makes her
so special as compared to other famous Roman women, for example.
Okay. So technically her name is Julia Agrippina, but she was known often as Agrippina the Younger
in a way that the Romans love. Her mother was also called Agrippina, and her mother
was also quite a prominent woman. She was the daughter of Agrippina the Elder and a
guy called Germanicus, who were the kind of young, sexy prince and princess of Rome during
the reign of Tiberius, who is the second Roman emperor. And Agrippina the Elder is the granddaughter
of Augustus, the divine Augustus by this point. And pretty much all of her brothers
and sisters have been killed or died under somewhat mysterious circumstances or have
dropped dead of disease. So she is pretty much the last one standing by the time Tiberius
comes to power. And so she is the last blood descendant of Augustus. And Germanicus is
the son of Antonia Minor. So he is the grandson of Mark Antony and he is adopted by Tiberius
and is like the second in line to the throne basically. But he is between them, they are
immensely popular. They are just absolutely like the Beatles in Rome. People run out in
the street and mob them wherever they go. They're just young and gorgeous and they have
six children. And he's a great general. He has loads of victories in Germany, which is
a big deal because under Augustus there was a great defeat in the German forests, which
made the Romans hate the Germans forever. And made Augustus very sad. They lost three
legions under a guy called Quictilius Varus, which is one of my favorite anecdotes about
Augustus actually, which is that he was so sad that for three months he stopped shaving
and cutting his hair and took up banging his head against walls shouting Quictilius Varus,
give me back my legions. But those Germans were led by a defector who was a Roman and
so they were a real problem. And finally, Germanicus beat them. So he got revenge on
the German tribes. And so he is considered to be this great Roman hero as a result.
And he has six children, three boys, three girls, of which Agrippina is the oldest girl,
who was born while he was in Germany actually in what is now, I'm going to say it in German,
right? Cologne. So he has the six children and then they all come back to Rome and then
Germanicus mysteriously dies while on holiday in Syria. And everybody thinks he's been poisoned
by Tiberius, caused a lot of problems. And I mean, first of all, through a solid decade,
yeah? So a solid decade later, after Agrippina is brought up by her mother alone and alongside
her brothers and sisters, her mother and older brothers, two oldest brothers are killed
by Tiberius under circumstances that we don't know because that bit of Tacitus is missing.
And the only brother left standing is Caligula, who a little bit after that becomes the emperor.
And she gets to be the sister of the emperor, which is pretty good.
I think you wrote in your book that we actually shouldn't call him Caligula because he had
a name, right?
He did have a name. His name was Gaius.
It's sort of disrespect to call him by the name they called the little kid in the army
camp.
Yeah. Because Caligula is a diminutive version of Caliga, which is what the Roman army sandal
is. So it's like calling him bootykins basically or little boots. And people would call him
it after he became a bad emperor because they didn't like him. And so they would do it
in order to mock him. And I have an absolutely irrational soft spot for a good-looking.
There is absolutely no good reason for why I like him so much, but I'm really defensive
of him and I always will try to defend him. So calling him Gaius just makes him sound
like a person as well, I think. When you call him Caligula, he becomes this semi-fictional
monster.
I actually wrote my undergraduate dissertation on modern representations of Caligula. And
there's so many, like he's in comic books, he's in all of these films, he's in all of
these cartoons and things where Caligula is a fictional monster who's so evil that he's
not even human. And I think that that makes when you say Caligula, people imagine something
that is so ludicrous that they lose sight of the fact that he was a person. And so I
tend to call him Gaius.
Yeah, I understand that. And I think that that is actually something that I've noticed
when I read your book, that you always try to convey that the people that we're reading
about or the people that you're writing about, they're actual people. It's not just these
templates or these ideas that we have when we think about Rome and about the people that
live there, that they're actually people and a lot of the things they do, it's just what
people do because they're people.
Yeah, and people are inconsistent and do odd things that you can't explain. And you just
need to look at any kind of politics and be like, I have no idea what this person is doing.
Not to get too political, but just look at what's happening at the moment in this country.
You're just like, what is happening here? None of this seems rational. People are odd and
they were all doing things for their own weirdo reasons. And sometimes they just do things
really rashly and sometimes they do things that go, oh, I don't even know why I did
that. And I think there's quite a lot of history, particularly ones that try to tell big narratives,
try to act like people are always very rational and are doing things for very rational reasons.
And I don't think that that's particularly true. I think people are probably mostly just
trying to get to the next day without fucking anything up too badly.
That is especially true for Rome at that time, because I think you mentioned a couple of
times that what a bad idea it is to give someone the power over an empire who's 17 years old,
for example.
Yeah, exactly.
So why would you do that?
It's ludicrous. And the only reason they do it is because he has the right blood, basically.
Gaius is like 27 when he gets the empire, but he is basically a child because he has
been hidden away on Capri and has never met anybody really. And then Nero is 17 when
he becomes the emperor. I've met 17-year-olds. We don't let them vote.
You probably wouldn't trust them with your car, so you certainly wouldn't trust them
with an empire.
Exactly. You trust them with an empire. And then all of a sudden they're expected to do
loads of paperwork and know how to do all of the diplomacy that they need to do and
do wars and do all of the other stuff. And unsurprisingly, Nero gives up on all of that
immediately and just goes into singing.
But let's just... I think we jumped a bit. And we don't have to do this in too much detail
just so we can keep the timeline, right? Because currently she's the sister of Caligula, who's
now the emperor, right?
Yes. And he is very good to his sisters and he gives them loads of honours and he thinks
they're brilliant. And in return they plot against him and plot to kill him with some
troops in Germany, which he discovers very early on into the plot. And there's this great
scene where he turns up at their holiday home in a place called Melvania and uncovers the
plot. And presumably there's some kind of terrible showdown that ends with Gaius reading
out Agrippina's love letters. And there's a trial and because he does like his sisters
quite a lot, he doesn't execute them, he exiles them. So she gets exiled to quite a nice island
actually called Pontia. And she spends a year in exile and during that year there is a more
successful coup against him involving his uncle Claudius and the army. So Roman emperors
have a kind of personal army in Rome, which is called the Praetorian Guard, who are very,
very important because they answer only to the emperor, they don't answer to the senate.
And they belong to the emperor and they are like a couple of thousand armed men who live
in the city of Rome who live to protect the emperor. And so when they turn against the
emperor, things tend to go quite badly.
And it's happened quite a bit, hasn't it? I mean, not at this time when I think it was
Gaius on the throne, but afterwards you had a couple of emperors that were sort of dethroned
by the Praetorian Guard, right?
Yeah, by the time you get to the third century, you get a lot. Every two years or so. And
but they are, yeah, but this is kind of the first time that they overthrow an emperor
and they install Claudius on the throne. Claudius is Germanicus's older brother, but he has
been considered the embarrassing member of the family because he has some kind of physical
disability and he is also very boring. So he has been kind of shuffled off and given
up. He's never been shown in public really and he's been hidden away and he's been writing
massive books about the history of the Etruscans and inventing new letters while everybody else
has been doing politics and war. And then all of a sudden he becomes the emperor and
very kindly he brings back Agrippina from exile and gives her a nice husband and tries
to keep her happy but quiet. So she becomes, she goes from being a sister of the emperor
to the exile to coming back and being a kind of upper class but not particularly prominent
woman. So she is, she's reasonably, she has access to the emperor because he's her uncle,
but she's not exactly like in a circle.
And at this point she's, that's actually her second marriage, right?
It is her second husband. She's married at 13 to a man in his 30s, obviously.
Obviously.
And then she had her one and only son who we remember as Nero but was born Lucius Domitius
Henebarbus and she had him in the first year of Caligula's reign. So he is kind of about
three or four by the time she gets back from exile. She is separated from him and her husband
dies while she is in exile. So she gets back, she gets her kid back, she gets a mediocre
husband and everything seems to be okay until the, Claudius's wife does something, and this
is one of the reasons why I say that people are weird. She decides while Claudius is on
a day trip to marry someone else in the middle of Rome.
As you do.
As you do. As the Empress of Rome in a city which is very public, you know, she has a
wedding ceremony and marries a guy. And even the bit of Tacitus when he's describing it
is just like, he just can't believe that it happened. He is just baffled by the fact
that it happened and it is utterly baffling. And of course this ends up in her being executed
because you can't have that kind of thing, which leaves Claudius, wife-less and something
happens that is super weird and mysterious and there's no real good explanation for it
and suddenly Claudius gets the law changed, the incest law changed and marries his niece,
marries Agrippina. And there is a very ludicrous scene where somebody else suggests in the
Senate that maybe they should change the incest law so that Claudius can marry his niece as
if it was a big surprise present for Claudius.
And he acted surprised because that was his job, right? To have someone deposit the idea
and he's then going to act like everyone just wants him to marry his niece.
Yeah, basically it's just a great mysterious surprise for him that everybody in Rome agrees
it's a great idea for him to do this very convenient and beneficial marriage because
he gets an almost adult heir because by the time this happens Nero is about 13, 14 years
old so he gets one who, as far as the Roman aristocracy are concerned, that's an adult.
He gets to marry Agrippina and she is enormously popular, everybody thinks she's great because
of her dad mostly. She gets this reflected glory from her dad that Claudius never gets
from being his brother. And so he gets her glory and prior to marrying her his reign
has not been going well. There's been a couple of attempts to overthrow him, there's been
a really big attempted coup with some troops trying to rise against him. He's executed
quite a lot of people because that's really the only thing he knows how to do. It's going
very badly indeed and so he kind of needs some good things, especially after the Messalina
debacle where she marries someone else which just looks bad when your wife marries someone
else while they're still married to you.
It's not a good look really.
It's not, it's embarrassing. No one wants to have to go out and tell their friends that
that's what's happened to you. Is it embarrassing enough when you've got a break up anyway and
you have to go and tell everybody that you break up without having to like, he's literally
married someone else.
Well it's so interesting because we talked earlier about how people make decisions and
you don't know why they make them because they're so blatantly stupid for example. And
I think when you talked about Messalina, his wife marrying this other guy, that you simply
think that, because historians try to explain it, find an explanation for rather irrational
behaviour and you said in the book that in your mind she probably just wasn't that smart.
Yeah, no I don't think she was very smart, Lasse. I think that she just didn't really
think it through more than the fact that she wanted to do it. And that, you know, it went
badly for her. God knows what she thought was going to happen, but I think she just
wasn't very clever. She was very young. She was 17 when she married Claudius and she was
21 when she became suddenly the wife of the emperor and she's still in her mid-twenties
when she dies and she's had two kids. She's young and an idiot.
Probably. I mean that is sort of the misconception people have when they read about people from
the past. They think everyone was a super villain, super intelligent or everything simply
because people wrote about them, but there's idiots nowadays so why shouldn't there have
been idiots back then?
I'm pretty sure that Messalina was just kind of a bless her, just kind of an idiot who
did idiotic things. I feel slightly defensive of her as well just because she was so young
and I just think she didn't get much of a chance. And she also was probably not very
smart. She just seems to have done everything a bit wrong.
There's actually a couple of people in your book that did everything wrong.
There are a few people who just seem to blunder from one bit to the other until eventually
they fall on a sword.
So Messalina, Claudius' wife, she gets executed.
She does along with eight other men, yeah.
Oh right, no, we've been there already. I sort of jumped back again. We're already
at Agrippina.
We're already married, yeah. How Tacitus presents the fact that he marries his niece
is that there is this kind of philosophical round table between Claudius and his closest
advisors who are all ex-slaves. Each of the advisors has a candidate for marriage, so
they're all trying to put forward their best candidate. One of whom is Claudius' first
wife, one of whom is a woman called Lolia Paulina who is remembered because she is just
very pretty. She married Caligula briefly, but he divorced her because it turns out she
didn't have anything more really than being very pretty.
So they offer up all these other women and then one of them offers up Agrippina and says
basically we know that she's fertile, she's got a good bloodline, we know that you get
on, she will be good for the dynasty, she'll be good for your popularity and if you're
lucky she might have babies, which is super gross. Basically the argument that they make
is that if the most honorable marriage you can make is with a member of the imperial
family then the emperor should only marry a member of the imperial family because he
should only marry the most honorable woman. So that's their brilliant argument. Obviously
it's a set piece that he writes that this happened. Maybe it is indicative of palace
workings, palace machinations, but that's his theory. But that makes Agrippina a passive
object in that she had nothing to do with it. Suetonius, who is a biographer, says
that she seduced him by sitting on his lap and kissing his cheek, which is a way of making
her basically into a whore and making Claudius into somebody who's too dumb to do anything.
As soon as there's a woman in front of him he just has to marry her regardless of what's
going on. Possibly it was somewhere in the middle, possibly it was something completely
different, possibly he decided that he wanted to marry her and she as a woman had no legal
power and had no ability to say no, which I think is something that is often forgotten
when we're talking about this stuff. If she didn't want to marry her uncle, she had absolutely
no ability to say no. It would have been marry him or probably die. But yeah, they got married
on New Year's Day and then she was married to her 50-year-old uncle, her third husband.
And then Tacitus writes about this as if an earthquake hit Rome that day and everything
afterwards picking up after the earthquake because he thinks that she immediately becomes
powerful and Tacitus hates that.
It shouldn't happen in Rome, right? To have a powerful woman like that?
It absolutely should not happen in Rome. Everything is set up specifically to prevent that. But
also everything in their system was very carefully set up after they threw the kings
out to prevent one person from having lots of power. And they've now got a monarchy.
Things go wrong every so often.
It's interesting that Agrippina already, back when she was just Caligula's sister or Guy's
sister, she already had more, not more power, but she had more freedom than a woman usually
had because he invested her with the vestal virgin privileges, right?
Yes, he did.
So she was kind of used to not having to live strictly in that system.
She was released from a lot of the legal constraints that were put on women. And she was also given
a lot of power. Romans had lictors, which were people who would walk beside men who
were in the Roman government. So if you were a Roman magistrate, you had an official job,
then you got a lictor or two lictors, if you were very important, who would walk in front
of you and they would carry the facies, so the bundle of sticks with an axe in it, which
represented the power of the state and the ability of the state to kill you. Which really
get the word fascism. And so the more you had, the better you were. By the time you
get to them having emperors, an emperor would have about 12, so it was a procession of lictors
walking down the street. And so she was given a lictor, under Gaius, and she was given the
ability to ride in a special cart and got the best seats at the games and things like
that. And also the ability to sign contracts without having a man do it for you, which
is probably even more important.
One thing I'm not quite clear about, because when she was just a guy's sister, she had
these privileges, right? Then she was exiled and when she came back, did she still have
those privileges or were they gone?
No, they would have been gone. So all of that was kind of stripped from her. And she got
them back when she became Agrippina Augusta. So in the first year of Claudius's reign,
first year of her marriage to Claudius, she got given the title of Augusta, which is the
feminine version of Augustus, which by that time had become basically the title of emperor.
So when you became emperor, you took the name Augustus. And she is the first young woman
to and the first woman is still involved in public life to take that title. And then
she gets all of that stuff back. And that's the point at which she becomes really special
and really important in the Roman world.
And she effectively becomes the empress of Rome.
Yeah, that's the point where she becomes the first kind of proper empress. So there are
two women before her who get given that title. One of them is Livia, Augustus's wife, but
after he dies when she is quite elderly and she is basically still confined to a domestic
space by Tiberius. And the other is Antonia Minor when she is very old indeed and practically
bedridden. She doesn't get to exercise it very much. Whereas Agrippina is in her thirties
and she is granted this title and she immediately becomes the emperor's partner. And that is
the first time that a woman has become a partner in rule. Every previous woman has kind of
confined themselves for better or for worse to the proper domestic sphere of womanly influence.
And Agrippina shows up receiving diplomatic missions and appearing sitting on a throne
next to Claudius and becomes a part of his advisory council and absolutely scandalises
everybody as a result because a woman has never done that before. And a woman is not
supposed to do that and the Romans literally think that women are incapable of doing that.
So they don't like it one bit.
Well, they've never actually had someone do it so they wouldn't even know if they could
do it. But they just assume it's impossible because obviously they're not men.
As far as they're concerned, every woman who ever has any kind of power immediately shows
her kind of feminine nature and becomes cruel and despotic and tyrannical. And if you asked
a Roman they would give you infinite examples of this happening. And most of them would
be women ruling households full of slaves, but they consider that to be the proper place
for women. And even then they think they can't do it particularly well.
And I think that you mentioned in the book as well that what Agrippina does is she sort
of tries to be masculine in her demeanour. So she doesn't flaunt her femininity, but
rather sort of tries to mimic the way that men would behave. Which of course then they
kind of said that's not right either.
Yeah, it's a lose-lose situation because if she had dressed in pretty dresses and worn
lots of jewels and been feminine, then she would have been criticised for spending too
much money on jewels and being feminine and luxurious. But because she is quite austere
and she's notorious for being anti-luxurious, she doesn't wear lots of jewels, she doesn't
wear big embroidered tunics, she wears fairly basic clothing and she has no real interest
in big dinner parties and luxury and spending lots of money. And she doesn't decorate herself
like women are supposed to decorate themselves. Therefore she is considered to be freakishly
masculine and kind of disgusting that way instead. So she is a bad woman if she does
womanly things and she's a bad woman if she does masculine things. So she couldn't win
whatever she did, so she just does her thing. At one point she does try to mix the two together
and she turns up in a very spectacular event wearing a masculine Greek military cloak made
of gold thread in order to really annoy everybody by wearing man's clothing but man's clothing
made of gold. But that's because she's kind of great and I love that kind of the fact
that she would occasionally, she just has no fear at all and I find that amazing. She
does things that no other woman I think would try to do, no other person would really try
to do because they know how much opprobrium they would get for it. And the first time
that she appears beside Claudius, she's receiving a British prisoner who has been causing problems
in Britain for a long time called Caratacus and they finally capture him and bring him
to Rome and he is paraded through the streets and then brought to Claudius. And sitting
in next to Claudius on her own throne in front of the kind of big standards and the flags
of Rome and the army is Agrippina and it's just such a shocking thing for them to see
and it's such a really powerful moment and it must have been kind of quite a shock for
the people as she kind of came out and sat down. It must have been quite the ripple of
excitement going through the crowd and it really is something that people talked about
for a long time afterwards because she was really putting herself in a public space and
sitting next to her husband and saying, I am the Augusta, he is the Augustus, we come
as a team.
And I mean that was probably sort of the outward way of showing what had been happening sort
of inside the palace as well when the clients came to talk to the emperor and then there
was suddenly the empress as well and basically doing the emperor's job.
Yeah, sitting next to him, hearing out, doing the deals that you do and the day, like most
of an elite Roman person's day is taken up with the round of meetings that you have in
the morning with your clients and patrons. And when you're the emperor you just have
a lot of clients who rely on you for their careers and who come and see you every morning
and you have to talk to them all every single day. And it's a really big ritual part of
the Roman day and she would all of a sudden have been there receiving all of Claudius'
clients as her own being. And then they would go off and discuss matters of the empire with
his advisors who were all men and the head of the Praetorian Guard and all of the other
politicians and consuls and senators who were close to Claudius would be there and then
there would be this woman in the middle of it for the first time in history. Just being
the first person to ever do that and causing absolute shock because it was just beyond
anything that they could really imagine that a woman would try to do this.
So what would you say, what is the reason why it works for Agrippina? I mean what were
the things that she did or was it the fact that Claudius was kind of feeble or weak?
It is the fact that Claudius let her, yeah. It is a monarchy in the end. Roman monarchy
is a very strange monarchy in that it is balanced on two legs, the army and the senate, both
of whom have to be kept happy all the time. But it is still a monarchy and Claudius is
still the only person who gets a say in what happens day to day. As long as Claudius lets
her be there and Claudius doesn't say anything, no one is going to say, what the hell is she
doing here because Claudius can have them executed at any minute.
Sure. I mean it's not unheard of.
Yeah and he quite likes doing that, they're all quite afraid of him. And also it helps
that she's really good at keeping people happy. When you burrow down into what was
happening after she came into power alongside Claudius, you see that she very carefully
balances giving everybody something so that nobody is unhappy at any time. So when she
needs to make changes, everybody gets something and nobody gets nothing. So there is no reason
for people to resent her. She doesn't destroy people's careers, she might shift their career
around a little bit, but she doesn't have them thrown in the Tiber or exiled, which
she could have done but doesn't. And so she is very good at making friends. And when you
look at things like how many people are executed or exiled during Claudius's reign, you see
that almost all of them happen before Agrippina comes into power. And there are no attempts
against Claudius's life that don't come from Agrippina. After she becomes Empress, the
coups and attempted assassinations just drop off. And she is involved clearly in arranging
some quite difficult situations. So there's a big situation in Jerusalem, which could
be really difficult that because she is involved in it ends up being managed without kicking
off into a war, which it does a few years later under Nero. And she's just really good
at diplomacy. And obviously Tacitus describes all of these as really terrible things because
she's involved in them. But when you take a step back from how he's describing it and
look at what he's describing, you see that she's doing really good work. And so people
have, apart from the fact that she's a woman, people don't have too much of a reason to
hate her.
And I mean, that's interesting that you said that Tacitus is the one who's describing how
terrible it is that she has that sort of power, but doesn't even realize that he's describing
a stabilizing force in the whole empire and responsible for the fact that Claudius wasn't
killed even earlier than he was.
I don't think he necessarily thinks it's a good thing that Claudius wasn't killed earlier.
He's not a mad fan of Claudius. If he had his way, then the entire Julio-Claudian family
would have been thrown in a volcano very early.
Just in the sense that as a spectator or an observer, you don't root for anyone to be
killed generally.
And that is what he describes. He thinks he's describing the absolute degradation of Rome.
The worst that it gets is under Agrippina and then Agrippina is responsible for Nero.
And Nero is universally considered to be bad. He has zero friends in Rome ever. So Agrippina
is the very bottom of how bad it can get in Rome as far as Tartusitus is concerned.
But what he is describing is a pretty stable, very good, strong reign where she does lots
of good things, where she's founding colonies, where she is keeping the edge of the empire
happy. She keeps the center of Rome happy. There's no real disasters or famines or anything
during her reign. And he describes a really good five-year period of rule.
Speaking of founding colonies for the benefit of our German listeners, you mentioned it
before where she was born, which is interesting because it's basically, the name you said
is the name derived from the colony that she founded. So could you maybe just say a few
things about that?
So yeah, so she was born on the edge of the Rhine in what was a Roman camp. It was originally
the home of a people called the Ubi and then the Romans were friends with them. So it became
a Roman camp and she was born there. It was a base for when Germanicus was moving into
Germany. And then when she became Empress, she decided to found a city there, found
a colony and a Roman colony is where they would settle Roman soldiers. So everybody
there became a Roman citizen and then the person who founded it would become a kind
of patron of the city and they would look after it and it would get lots of investment.
And it was called Colonia Claudia Ara Agrippinensium, which gradually got, it became a very big
center of Roman activity there. It became a really big center for glass manufacture,
really big place where a lot of artisanal glass came from and a lot of the glass that
was used by the Roman Empire. It became a really big space for Roman culture in that
part of the world and gradually that name got shortened to Colonia, just the colony
and gradually that became Coln, what we call Cologne in English. But it is her space.
And a couple of years ago in 2015, which is the 2000 years from Agrippina's birth, they
did have a big celebration of her in the museum there. She's better known in Cologne
than she is probably anywhere else in the world because they have a big parade every
year and they have the mother of Cologne, Agrippina, is like this character that gets
to be in it and she's kind of pantomime tart. But it's something. So she's the founder
of the city and she does that much better than Claudius ever managed to do because she
doesn't kick anybody out. Whereas Claudius founds a couple of places in Britain, but
every time he does it, he removes everybody who's there and then gives all of their land
to some Roman soldiers. And then you end up with things like the revolt of Boudicca,
which happens quite just before this really. And then Agrippina does it very successfully
and it becomes a massive centre of activity. She does everything well.
So the people of Cologne are basically the ones that should be thankful to Agrippina
for the fact that they're cultured like that because they were, you know, that their city
was born out of Roman culture and class making and all that.
Absolutely. They wouldn't exist if it wasn't for Agrippina. I mean, somebody else might
have founded a city there, but it exists as it exists because of her. And I went there
actually. I made my partner go on a holiday there and it's a lovely city. Great cathedral,
lovely museum, highly recommended for a visit.
And I think they have quite good beer as well. They do have very good beer and they do that
little, that thing, which I think they only really do there, where they give you like
a quarter pint and then they just keep coming round and giving you new ones and before you
know it, you've drunk about five and you can't stand up.
That's convenient. It is. But it tastes very nice.
Right. So, generally she was a very good influence on the empire basically or on Claudius and
then the empire. And then things go south?
Things go a bit south, yes, when she kills Claudius, which is a real problem.
Things go a bit south.
They do go a bit south. There's a whole debate and I have a debate with myself back and forth
constantly as to whether she did kill Claudius. And in the end I came to the conclusion that
every single source says that she did, including the very tiny number of contemporary sources.
People that lived and worked alongside Agrippina said that that is what happened. So, quite
possibly I think I have to lean into the fact that she probably did actually kill him.
And quite possibly it's because the thing that is the most important to her is getting
Nero to be emperor. That is the kind of defining goal of her life really, which is not so much
because she doesn't want to rule by herself and she never really tries to rule by herself.
She wants Nero to be emperor. But Claudius had a biological son of his own and for a
long time it was fine because Nero was six years older than Britannicus and his mother
was around. He was given proper jobs as a judge and things when he was about 14 years
old, which is very silly. He was made prefect of the city of Rome. I just keep thinking
of all these people who had to deal with him on an official basis and just looking at this
spotty teenager. And he's supposed to be making important judgments about crimes going on
in the city. But as Britannicus grows up and starts to hit adulthood himself or adulthood
in the Roman census, that's kind of up to 13, 14 years old, he becomes a threat basically
and it's possible that Nero won't become emperor. Possibly Claudius will want his son
to take on maybe a joint emperor role or he will want him to be emperor instead of Nero.
And so as that starts to happen, Claudius mysteriously dies after eating a mushroom
that may or may not have been poisoned by Agrippina and a woman called La Custa, who
is a notorious and very famous poisoner. And then I think that Agrippina expects everything
will be all uphill from there because she manages, she kind of arranges it all very
carefully so that Nero, who is 17, comes out and is hailed as emperor immediately. She
has been in charge of his education. She has given him these two tutors called Seneca
and Burrus. Burrus is the head of the Praetorian Guard and he is like the head of the army.
So he's on side Seneca is this famous philosopher who I irrationally hate.
Well, he's not a very grateful person, is he?
I mean, he's not a very grateful person. He's been brought back from exile twice,
I think, by Agrippina. And he's still being a shit to her.
He's a real shit to her and he's given the job as being the advisor to the emperor and
he's kind of given everything by her. And he is kind of notorious. It's kind of a joke
that he is this famous stoic philosopher who failed to live up to any of his stoic principles.
He writes loads and loads about mercy and about being austere and about not reacting
badly to things. And yet he, this dio for some reason, really hates him, which I find
really funny. And he writes all these passages about how he owned 150 tables. He writes about
being modest and austere, but owns all of these tables and spends all of this money
on himself while chastising everybody else for spending too much money. So he'll complain
about other people's luxury while living in a luxurious palace of his own. And the only
time he ever manages to live up to his own ideals is as soon as it comes to the idea
of a woman in power, at which point he undermines his patron Agrippina at every turn. As soon
as Nero becomes emperor, Seneca writes this speech for Nero in which he says that the
first thing that's going to change in the Roman emperor is that there's going to be
no more interference from the imperial household in politics. So there'll be no more freedmen
and slaves and women involved in politics basically, which is a direct blow and saying
no more girls. And then there is this moment that happens, which is this great turning
point in Agrippina's career where in the first year of Nero's reign, he is receiving
a delegation of people from Armenia, who are kind of this buffer zone between the Roman
Empire and the Parthian Empire. And both sides always want to control it because they want
this buffer zone against the others. So Armenians are always turning up. And there looks like
there might be a war against Parthia in Armenia and everybody's very on edge and everybody's
very concerned that it's going to be a child led by a woman leading this war. And the
delegation comes and they're all prepared and Nero comes in and sits down and then Agrippina
comes in and goes to step up onto the dais to take her seat. And Seneca whispers in Nero's
ear and Nero has this kind of split second decision as to whether he is going to let
his mother sit down and receive this delegation with him or whether he is going to prevent
her from being there and whether he's going to be a partner with his mother and let her
continue her role or whether he's going to side with what Seneca is telling him to do
and remove her. And he chooses Seneca and he stands up and greets his mother and gives
her a hug and then carefully leads her away and takes her out of the room. And basically
says to her with that action, you are no longer a partner in this ruling this empire. You
are my mother and you will be in a motherly role and I am the emperor and this is man's
business. And then in order to make it up for her in the final kind of spit in the eye,
he buys her a pretty dress and basically says to her, now you are ornamental, your role
is ornamental to be domestic and pretty and stand over there and I will do, me and Seneca
over here will do the business, which she kind of takes as you would quite badly.
Either he doesn't know his mother or he really wants to piss her off.
Or he knows exactly how to hurt her. It is like either that dress when he buys her the
dress I just think either he is like a rubbish husband who just brings home flowers from
the corner shop to say sorry for something and just doesn't even think or try. He just
thinks what do women like pretty things, I'll just give her that. And he just doesn't know.
Or it is an insult. It's just such a deliberate insult to her. And the fact that their relationship
goes downhill quite quickly and she is later evicted from the imperial house. So she is
sent to live in another house and she is banned from receiving male visitors. So people aren't
allowed to go and talk to her anymore and she is kind of ostracised within Rome. And
then there is a moment where she comes very, very close to being either exiled or executed
because her ex-sister-in-law kind of drums up this very weird conspiracy while Nero
is drunk and nearly gets him to execute Agrippina in the middle of the night for allegedly conspiring
against him. But is stopped by Burrus actually who is pretty loyal to Agrippina all the way
through to be fair to him. And there is this great moment where Burrus basically says look
you're drunk, calm down, we'll sort it out in the morning, go and sleep it off and we'll
talk to your mum in the morning and we'll see what happens and we'll just let her have
her say. So Nero goes and sleeps it off and the next morning Burrus goes and sees Agrippina
and tells her what's going on. And she demands a meeting with her son and there's this kind
of behind closed doors chat which no one knows what happens. But by the time she goes in
on the verge, the last thing he said is that he wants her dead and by the time she comes
out she is back in the palace. Some of her friends have got new jobs, like one of her
best friends suddenly becomes the prefect of Egypt and the people who accused her are
all exiled. So she has talked her way out of being executed and back into his good books
which is brilliant.
Well she was probably like listen you little shit.
Yeah, look what the fuck do you think you're doing? Yeah and at that point, Tacitus has
nothing more to say about her for five years. She vanishes, just completely vanishes.
So she vanishes from the source, from the source material, but she doesn't vanish from
Rome.
No, she's still in Rome. She's still pretty, like all of this is speculation because there's
nothing written down as to what she's doing, nothing stated as to what she's doing, but
she is almost certainly around and still involved in politics and doing kind of behind the scenes
political things. So she is no longer doing spectacular things like appearing in a big
cloak made of gold in front of massive audiences or receiving delegations and things which
make people talk. She is doing more behind the scenes things and involved in Nero's
reign and the reason that I'm pretty confident in saying that is one, the first five years
of Nero's reign are pretty good. He doesn't do anything too terrible or fuck anything
up too badly despite being effectively incompetent and two, because after that five years he
decides to kill her and if she is happily sitting in a villa somewhere outside of Rome
or chilling somewhere not involved in politics and not doing anything at all, then there
is no reason for him to kill her. The general reason which is given for his decision is
that she is constantly trying to be involved in his life and that he wants to marry a woman
called Poppaea but he already has a wife called Octavia who is also his step-sister obviously.
So he has this wife who is a very quiet, seemingly quite nice girl who Agrippina is great friends
with and there is no situation where Agrippina will let him divorce Octavia. Octavia is really
popular, she is a great wife of the emperor, she never does anything to cause trouble,
she is just good at getting on with stuff, she is like a proper good little Kate Middleton
kind of girl, she is just really well behaved and there is no way that Agrippina is going
to let him divorce her without breaking his knees and it would just end badly. But he
really really really wants to marry Poppaea and he really dislikes Octavia and the best
thing that he can think of as a way to deal with this because he is the emperor and he
can is to just kill his mother. And if she is not a big enough force that in Rome and
in Roman politics that he can't get away with doing stuff as the emperor without killing
her, that's the only way that he can get around it, then that suggests that she is still really
important. The other thing of course is that he initially tries to get Burris to just stab
her because that's the easiest way to kill somebody in Rome when you are the emperor,
just be like can you go and stab her please. Burris says that no soldier will kill her
because they like her too much, that no soldier is ever going to kill the daughter of Germanicus.
So she still has this immense popularity and it's just not going to happen so he has to
come up with some bizarre series of events to try and kill her without making it look
like he killed her.
Do you want to go into the detail of the foil plot in the boat?
Yeah, there's a few different plots which get put together in different sources. So
there's one plot which involves him poisoning her which seems very sensible but it turns
out that she takes antidotes so poisons don't work so she is taking antidotes. And then
there is a bizarre plot which Suetonius says which makes little to no sense which is that
he's going to rig the ceiling of her bedroom so that it collapses on her while she's sleeping
and that gets foiled because nobody in her household will turn against her. She has a
loyal household so nobody will let the workmen in.
Yeah, gotta install new air conditioning.
Exactly. So this guy who is in charge of the navy has seen some kind of games with
a trick boat and he thinks this is a great idea so he comes to Nero and says look there's
this trick boat that we can use and it's really unclear how it works but it either
kind of collapses or opens in some way or kind of dips or something and the people
on one side are thrown off and then it kind of goes back together again so it's a kind
of show boat of some kind that makes little sense. And Nero because he's very theatrical
as a man thinks that's a great idea so he gets Agrippina to come and visit him for a festival and they have a nice dinner and then he gets Agrippina to this dinner and they go have a nice dinner and then he takes her down to the dock and puts her on this boat and this kind of shows the ludicrous
richness of the imperial throne which is that they get boats from each other's houses that's so far apart that they just get a boat from each other's house back home again. Puts her on this boat and Tastis has this very nice picture that he paints of this calm night and her lazing on this boat and them kind of floating under the stars and then all of a sudden the boat collapses.
She is tossed into the water but in the demonstration of how poorly Nero knows his mother he doesn't know that she's a very strong swimmer and is able to without much problem and with an injured arm swim happily to the shore.
Her maidservant, her slave gets off slightly less well by shouting help me help me I'm Agrippina and gets beaten to death with an oar. But Agrippina is smarter than that. She gets happily over to the sun, she walks back to her house and she sends a messenger to Nero's house to say
Wouldn't you know, there's been an accident. What a mysterious thing that has happened. And then she waits for the response because I think she can't believe that it has really been a plot against her. She hopes that it has been an accident because she just sits and waits.
And what Nero sends back is a man, well he sends back troops. He sends a whole lot of troops with knives and he sets up this weird thing where he throws a dagger at the feet of the messenger that Agrippina sent and says oh my goodness Agrippina sent someone to kill me, better send someone off to kill her.
And these troops come in and drag out her slaves and stab her to death in her bedroom. And her last words according to Tacitus are telling them really to stab her in her womb because that's where Nero came from.
And that she is immediately cremated by her household, by her slaves and freedmen in the garden and then her ashes are buried by the side of the road.
So no big funeral?
No big funeral. She never got to be interred in the mausoleum of Augustus where the rest of her family were. She never got to be mourned properly and in fact because Nero told everybody that it was a plot against her that he kind of forced everybody to give thanks for her death instead of mourning her and kind of prevented people from mourning her at all.
So she was, for really the rest of his reign, he still occasionally celebrated her birthday which is very odd but she was kind of forcibly forgotten.
Which is not, I think, what she would have wanted or expected in any way. I think that when she was at the top of the Roman world, the idea that she would be buried and lost and not forgotten but would not have golden statues of her paraded through the streets and a huge wailing funeral would never have really occurred to her.
But that's what happened.
Well at least she's on a float once a year.
She is on a float once a year. I feel like that would probably make her happy.
I mean on the other hand when you look at her and what she aspired to while she was alive, that she sort of had this kind of power that no woman had before her, it's probably, she cares less about being dead and more or less forgotten than she cared about not having had that power when she lived.
So in the end, she probably was right with having the power when she's dead. Well, she's dead.
Yeah, and in the end she got the thing that she wanted the most, which was that her son was the emperor.
And it stayed, it got back into the Julian side of the family and away from the Claudian side of the family.
Admittedly he did end the entire lineage by being so bad at it but she couldn't have predicted that.
But her final achievement was that Nero got to be emperor, which he never would have without her.
Yeah, I think the thoughts of a mother wanting to sort of doing everything that her offspring is, you know, sort of becomes either emperor or king.
And usually these kinds of women are the ones that are sort of reviled by the historiographers, right?
So it's like you shouldn't have ambition when you're a woman.
Absolutely not, even if that ambition is for your children, right?
That you are still being involved in an area that only men are supposed to be in.
And you are therefore inherently doing something that you shouldn't be doing, so you should just immediately stop.
And any woman that does that has to be punished in the history books and has to be reviled in order to show any future women what will happen to them if they try it.
And there are no women really after Agrippina who tried to do what she did for a very long time, for like 150 years, until the Severan dynasty.
You don't know other women tries to do what she did or tries to be as prominent and as actively powerful as she was.
So it kind of works, like remembering her as this terrible villain and remembering writing about her as though she is this failure in every way,
as this degraded representative of everything that can go wrong, works in preventing other women from being able to do what she did.
I mean, the historians or the historiographers, they do that with men as well.
But I think that the way they do it with women is like a more backhanded kind of thing, you know what I mean?
We actually did, or I did an episode on this Bohemian queen or empress actually from the 15th century, Barbara of Sili.
And she was Holy Roman Empress and she was known as the Black Queen mainly because they said that she was like an alchemist, which was not that bad, but at least.
But also that she did all these occult things and was actually a vampire.
Amazing.
And I mean, she was very involved with all kinds of church stuff, so it's not like it was probable that she was a vampire.
These were all the things that were sort of attributed to her because she was in a feud with Albert II of Habsburg fame.
And the Habsburgs won, yeah.
Right. And so you need to find just one who sort of plans, you know, rumours or sort of this negative connotation of the name,
and then it sort of through the centuries, it'll just get picked up and sort of embellished and then you have what you have with Agrippina or Barbara of Sili.
Yeah, and that people are so willing to believe it as well is the thing. It is because the story of the monstrous woman is such an easily believable story to men who hate women.
That it is so pleasing for people to continually tell the story.
And that's obviously a great story that they said she was a vampire. That's brilliant.
That's the kind of story that I would tell.
Like you would totally repeat that if somebody said it to you about a politician. If somebody said to you, the Queen of England is a vampire, you'd be like, amazing.
Which is why, yeah, exactly. Why I talk so much at the beginning of the book about the story that David Cameron fucked a pig, which was a big deal here.
Which is, as I say, not true, true. Didn't happen. He did not have sex with a pig. But it's such a good story and it fits so well what people who don't like David Cameron think of David Cameron.
That he is like this big, stupid Tory who would do anything in order to be liked.
And that he's massively posh and goes to parties where they have pigs' heads on the table. That it kind of doesn't matter whether it happened or not, it's too good a story not to tell.
And that stuck to him forever. And in like 100 years time, 200 years time, when people write biographies about David Cameron, they'll have to include it.
You can't not write about it and not write about Pig Gate.
I think it's probably more flattering for him to be remembered as the man who fucked a pig than the man who fucked Britain.
That's going to be the chapter titles though, like David Cameron fucked pig, David Cameron fucked Britain.
Those are going to have to be the sections in his biography forever and ever.
I'd say that sucks for him, but fuck him. And you get the same kind of story forever and ever.
For Barbara of Scilly you're just going to have to say, oh yeah, and people said she was a vampire.
Because it doesn't matter whether it was true or not, it's stuck to her now because it's too good a story and it worked too well with what people wanted to think about her.
And people are so happy to believe stories like that about any woman in power. Like, oh yeah, she just slept away there.
And an interesting connection between her and the story of Agrippina actually is that in the sources, Barbara of Scilly is called a German Messalina.
So they sort of directly compared it, even though she never killed anyone.
Never married anyone while she was married to someone else.
Right. She was just a woman. She was quite powerful. She had her own court.
Basically did what her husband did when it came to the work that a queen or a king does.
But she just had too much power, so all these things were kind of invented about her.
And this is kind of what happens to women. Men who do power badly get tarred. So Nero does power badly.
He doesn't do it right, so he gets remembered as a villain. But other men do power well and they get like, you know, Trajan.
Everybody loves Trajan. Everybody loves Marcus Aurelius.
But a woman being in power, it just gets reviled for being a woman with power. She can't do it right and she can't do it wrong because she's trapped in the bind of being a woman in power.
So she's already buggered.
Now she shouldn't even have tried. Why did she even try?
Why did she even try? Just sheer fearlessness.
And it went all right for a while. And it usually does go, you know, they're remembered badly and quite often they have to deal with all the nonsense, but they still get to be in power.
Well, the good thing about Agrippina is that, you know, finally in the year 2018, she got, you know, your book.
She did. Finally.
I think everything's all right again with the world of Agrippina.
We can actually look at it in a way where we're not just influenced by whatever Tacitus decided to write about her.
But sort of interpret the things that were written about her or the things that were not written about her.
And I think, I mean, we touched on that briefly in the beginning. When it comes to the sources, the really interesting thing I think is that what you mentioned as well, or not as well what you mentioned, that's why I know it,
that she just appears when she's there in connection with another man.
And when she does something that whoever writes about her, you know, doesn't really like.
Yeah, when she does something that impacts a man, then yeah, she is there and being remembered.
And usually because she's impacting a man, she's being annoying.
So that, and then when she's doing stuff that doesn't directly impact in a dramatic way a man next to her, then she just vanishes completely.
Because the sources are only written, which is why my book has had to really have the structure that it has where she is, you know, daughter, sister, niece, wife, mother, all of those are her relationship to other men.
And she is all of those things, but she is also a person who is separate from those things. But that person who existed separate from being the niece, wife, mother, sister of emperors is invisible to us.
We can only see her through those lenses of how those men impact her and how she impacts those men.
Anything else that she ever did is vanished because it's not interesting to Tastus.
Right. And I think that sort of leads us back to the beginning of our chat, which is already, I think, about an hour and a half long.
Yeah.
I didn't expect it to be that long, but it's just such a gripping story.
So I think it wouldn't do it justice to just do it in half an hour.
But I think we are at this point where we can say that telling the story of Agrippina in such a way the way you did it is just you doing your job as a historian.
Yeah.
And just taking these sources and taking the absence of her in the sources and taking the way she's described in the sources as a concert or a mother or a daughter or a sister and interpreting it in a way that it makes sense.
And I think you did it very well.
Thank you very much. I'm glad.
Again.
It still feels a bit weird to me that this book that I wrote mostly actually in Caravan and Bondour in Donegal in Ireland in the middle of nowhere, which belongs to my partner's parents, because it has no internet out there.
All right.
And we would go down there and so much of it was just written there in a haze really or in the middle of the night up in my tiny little spare bedroom.
And that is now like the people are actually reading it and enjoying it is just still feels very odd.
But it's brilliant.
I'm glad that people now know who Agrippina.
All I wanted really was for people to know who she was and to think that she was great.
Even if they don't particularly like her, she's not very likable, just be impressed by her.
Well, I think the way you describe it, she's not necessarily unlikable.
She's a complex person.
Yeah.
And I think that's one of the takeaways of your telling of her story.
But she's all kinds of things.
Yeah, she is.
Sort of a template.
So thank you very much for coming on and taking that much time out.
Thank you so much for having me.
Your busy evening, which you'd rather spend writing.
Sorry that my cat decided that she wanted to also be on the podcast.
No problem.
She was obviously jealous.
We're a cat friendly podcast.
Yeah.
She is called Olivia.
So she's Roman too.
Of course.
She wanted to be part of that.
Yeah.
Speaking of writing, are you working on another book?
I am working on another book.
It is about Roman murder.
So very different.
Very different.
I decided that I wanted to do something completely different.
I didn't want to write the same book twice.
So I'm writing some Roman true crime now.
Hopefully this week there's going to be like an official announcement from my publisher, which I'm waiting for.
Oh, perfect.
Yeah.
So that will be out in 2020.
So we're going to have you on again in 2020.
I can't even look forward to that one in about a year.
I hope lots of people will read your book now, even though you basically told the whole story.
I didn't put all the jokes.
There's loads of jokes in there.
Right.
Yeah.
It's a very funny book.
There's lots of pop culture references in there.
So if you're on Twitter or on Tumblr, you probably understand 90 percent of the jokes.
There's a lot of Twitter jokes in there because I spend a lot of my time on Twitter.
Well, I do too.
And that's why I actually saw that you had written that book.
Otherwise I probably, you know, I saw it on Twitter historians and whatnot.
And then I saw that book and I thought, that is a very good story.
And then I got it already and I thought, you have to tell it on the podcast.
Well, I hope I've done it justice.
Absolutely.
Thanks again.
And well, have a good evening.
And you.
Thank you.
I'm going to go and probably have a gin and tonic now.
Perfect.
And I think the perfect ending to this bonus episode about Agri Pina.
Thanks again to Dr. Emma Southern for the chat.
This was a bonus episode to episode 183, the regular German language episode.
If you've never listened to our podcast, but you do understand German, do have a look.
We have 182 other episodes already recorded.
I will leave you as always with the one person who always gets the last word in this podcast, Bruno Kreisky.
Lernen ist ein bisschen Geschichte. Lernen ist ein bisschen Geschichte. Dann werden Sie sehen, wie sich der Reporter damals entwickelt hat.